---
## Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
## To modify the layout, see https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults

layout: page
title:
  "Experiences and Preferences for Self-Guided Digital Intervention Apps for
  Eating Disorders"
---

Self-guided digital interventions for the treatment of eating disorders (EDs)
are becoming increasingly popular. However, the effectiveness of these
interventions is still under investigation. The meta-analysis "User Experiences
of and Preferences for Self-Guided Digital Interventions for the Treatment of
Mild to Moderate Eating Disorders" by Cheung et al. (2025) aims to provide
insights into the user experiences and preferences for these interventions.

<div class="highlight-box" markdown="1">
## Meta-Analysis Overview

**Focus of study**: User Experiences of and Preferences for Self-Guided Digital
Interventions for the Treatment of Mild to Moderate Eating Disorders

**Target Group**: Adults (18-67 years) with mild-moderate ED symptoms,
predominantly female and Caucasian, mostly self-reporting symptoms.

**Average Effect Size**: Most users reported positive experiences with digital
interventions, finding them convenient, flexible, and helpful for increasing
self-reflection and mindfulness. Digital interventions were effective in
reducing ED thoughts and behaviors. However, users generally perceived them as
insufficient as standalone treatments, viewing them either as an early
intervention before traditional therapy or as a "last resort" after unsuccessful
treatment attempts.

**Additional Findings**: Users strongly emphasized the need for personalization
and customization of digital interventions to accommodate diverse ED symptoms,
triggers, and knowledge levels, with preferences for varied content formats,
support options (both professional and peer), and intuitive interfaces that
minimize technical difficulties.

</div>

## Introduction

Eating disorders (EDs) represent a significant global health challenge, with
lifetime prevalence rates of 8.4% for women and 2.2% for men. Healthcare systems
worldwide struggle to meet treatment demands, particularly following the
COVID-19 pandemic which saw increased ED symptoms and referrals. Long waitlists
have forced specialist services to prioritize severe cases, leaving individuals
with mild to moderate EDs with limited options.

Digital interventions delivered through smartphone applications or websites
offer a promising solution. These interventions typically provide cognitive
behavioral therapy (CBT)-based approaches including psychoeducation, cognitive
restructuring, and self-monitoring components. They address both structural
barriers (providing immediate, low-cost access) and non-structural barriers such
as stigma by offering discrete treatment approaches.

Despite demonstrated effectiveness in reducing ED behaviors and attitudes with
medium effect sizes, digital interventions face significant challenges with
engagement. Dropout rates range from 5.3% to 76.8% (averaging 26.3%),
considerably higher than for face-to-face treatments, suggesting issues with
adherence that may limit their effectiveness.

The meta-analysis by Cheung et al. (2025) addresses these concerns by
systematically reviewing qualitative studies on user experiences and
preferences. The findings identified seven key metathemes including the appeal
of digital interventions, their perceived role in treatment, and design
preferences. While users generally reported positive experiences, they
emphasized the need for personalization to address diverse symptoms and
individual needs.

## What is the study about?

This meta-analysis investigates user experiences and preferences for self-guided
digital interventions designed to treat mild to moderate eating disorders in
adults. The researchers conducted a comprehensive review of qualitative studies
published between 2013 and 2024, ultimately including 8 studies after screening
3,695 search results. The included studies focused on primarily unguided digital
self-help interventions in naturalistic or outpatient settings. Studies were
excluded if they targeted prevention rather than treatment, involved
participants under 18 years old, focused on specific subgroups with comorbid
conditions, or featured fully guided interventions.

The meta-synthesis addressed two primary research questions: (1) What are user
experiences of digital interventions for reducing ED symptoms in adults? and (2)
What are user preferences for digital interventions for reducing ED symptoms in
adults? To answer these questions, the researchers conducted a thematic
synthesis using line-by-line coding of results from each study, generating
themes that captured key aspects of user experiences and preferences. This
approach allowed for an in-depth exploration of attitudes, views, and
experiences critical to intervention acceptability, outcome, and engagement.

Through systematic analysis, seven metathemes emerged that comprehensively
describe how users perceive and engage with digital ED interventions:

<table class="table table-bordered">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Metatheme</th>
      <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Appeal of Digital Interventions</strong></td>
      <td>
        How accessibility, anonymity, and flexibility make digital interventions attractive to users.
        <br /><br />
        <strong>Example Findings:</strong>
        <ul>
          <li>No waitlists and low cost compared to traditional therapy</li>
          <li>Discretion reduced shame and embarrassment</li>
          <li>Compatible with users' lifestyles and daily routines</li>
          <li>Technology offered protection through anonymity</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>The Role of Digital Interventions in Treatment</strong></td>
      <td>
        Perception of digital interventions as either a stepping stone to therapy or an alternative treatment option.
        <br /><br />
        <strong>Example Findings:</strong>
        <ul>
          <li>Viewed as "one tool in the toolbox" rather than sufficient standalone treatment</li>
          <li>Often used after exhausting other treatment options</li>
          <li>Sought out of desperation after unsuccessful traditional treatments</li>
          <li>Considered less intensive and less effective than face-to-face therapy</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Value of Support</strong></td>
      <td>
        The importance of both professional and peer support within interventions.
        <br /><br />
        <strong>Example Findings:</strong>
        <ul>
          <li>Professional support increased accountability and motivation</li>
          <li>Peer support reduced isolation and provided understanding</li>
          <li>Some users felt pressured by professional involvement</li>
          <li>Concerns about potential harm from peer interactions (e.g., sharing harmful thoughts)</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Communication at the Right Level</strong></td>
      <td>
        How language and tone affect acceptability and motivation to continue use.
        <br /><br />
        <strong>Example Findings:</strong>
        <ul>
          <li>Clinical language and acronyms were disliked</li>
          <li>Insensitive language significantly demotivated users</li>
          <li>Informal, caring language was preferred</li>
          <li>Balance needed between professional and approachable tone</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Importance of Engagement</strong></td>
      <td>
        Factors that facilitate initial use and continued engagement with interventions.
        <br /><br />
        <strong>Example Findings:</strong>
        <ul>
          <li>Regular updates with new content maintained interest</li>
          <li>Data input (logging moods, behaviors) encouraged continued use</li>
          <li>Interactive content facilitated initial engagement</li>
          <li>Predictable functions led to disengagement</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Shaping Knowledge to Improve ED Behaviors</strong></td>
      <td>
        How interventions increase self-awareness and improve eating behaviors.
        <br /><br />
        <strong>Example Findings:</strong>
        <ul>
          <li>Enhanced self-reflection about eating behaviors and beliefs</li>
          <li>Increased mindfulness before and during eating</li>
          <li>More scheduled eating and less emotional eating</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Design of the Digital Intervention</strong></td>
      <td>
        Preferences regarding functions, media format, user interface, and customization.
        <br /><br />
        <strong>Example Findings:</strong>
        <ul>
          <li>Mixed views on food logging (helpful vs. potentially harmful)</li>
          <li>Variety of media formats (audio, visual, text) preferred over text-heavy content</li>
          <li>Divergent preferences on interface design (simple vs. colorful)</li>
          <li>Strong desire for personalization to address individual triggers and symptoms</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

These themes provide valuable insights into why users engage with or disengage
from digital interventions, highlighting the importance of personalization and
user-centered design to improve adherence and effectiveness.

## What does the study tell us?

This meta-analysis reveals that **self-guided digital interventions for eating
disorders offer significant benefits** through their accessibility, anonymity,
and flexibility. Users consistently reported that these interventions **enhanced
self-awareness and reflection**, promoting mindfulness during challenging
moments and reducing eating disorder thoughts and behaviors. The _convenience
and discrete nature_ of digital tools created a safe environment for users to
engage with treatment without fear of stigma or judgment.

However, the study uncovers an important limitation: users generally **did not
perceive digital interventions as sufficient standalone treatments**. Most
participants viewed these tools either as a _stepping stone to traditional
therapy_ or as a _"last resort"_ after unsuccessful treatment attempts. The
effectiveness of digital interventions was **significantly influenced by
personalization options**, with users emphasizing the need for customizable
content and functions to address their unique symptoms, triggers, and knowledge
levels.

The findings highlight that **support remains crucial** in digital
interventions, whether from professionals (providing accountability and
guidance) or peers (reducing isolation and offering understanding). Users
strongly preferred varied content formats (audio, visual, text) over text-heavy
presentations and expressed divergent preferences regarding interface design and
features like food logging. Perhaps most importantly, the meta-analysis
demonstrates that **user engagement is directly linked to perceived relevance**
of the intervention to individual needs, suggesting that _future development
should prioritize adaptive, person-centered approaches_ that can evolve with
users throughout their recovery journey.

## How do we assess this study?

:ghost: _Fill in here_

### Substance of Effects

:ghost: _Fill in here_

### Differentiation

:ghost: _Fill in here_

### Generalizability

:ghost: _Fill in here_

### Scientific Relevance

:ghost: _Fill in here_

### Methodolocical Rigor

:ghost: _Fill in here_

## Practical Implications

:ghost: _Fill in here_

## Illustrative Study Example

:ghost: _Fill in here_
